As questions about artificial intelligence’s role in schools continue to grow, a new industry effort encourages education and technology companies to commit to using AI responsibly and advocate for its effective use in schools.
TheEdSAFE AI Alliance, an advocacy organization, has launchedan industry councilwith more than 50 founding member companies that are agreeing to ensure that AI development is safe, accountable, fair, and effective — foundational principles of the parent organization.
“There’s a massive amount of capacity for AI in our education technology solution providers. So how do we ensure that we’re working together?” said Karl Rectanus, chair of theEdSAFE AI Industry Council, in explaining the industry group’s purpose.
“This was our big-tent strategy to help any company participate and open up lines of communication and to equip everybody to have shared lexicon, shared updates, shared information.”
JoinEdWeek Market Brief’sonline forum, being held on the afternoons of June 11-12. We’ll be having great panels, briefings, and interactive sessions on topics including how to stage an effective pilot; untapped opportunities for companies in the federal Title I program; keys to effective e-mail campaigns; whether your organization should launch an education podcast, and more. You cansign up here.

The EdSAFE AI Industry Council is meant to inform, support, and advocate for best AI practices across products and public policies that align with the alliance’s standards.
The organization’s framework was developed with the help of two dozen education associations, nonprofits, and policy groups with the goal of working towardAI technologies that are safe, accessible, and meaningful for students and teachers.
The EdSAFE AI Alliance was founded in 2020 as a global effort to develop AI research, policy, and practice, led byInnovateEDU, a nonprofit that aims to bridge gaps in education. Its new industry council has been formed this year, with companies beginning to register for membership during the spring.
Companies that have already committed to the council include public and private organizations of all sizes, such asCarnegie Learning,McGraw Hill,Google, andKyron Learning. The industry council will continue to accept new applicants who agree to align their policies and practices to theSAFE Framework.
These principles include a commitment to protecting users’ safety, as well as a dedication to transparency in development and implementation, and inclusivity and fairness.
“School districts, state leaders, policymakers will have visibility to companies that have committed and are members of the EdSAFE AI Industry Council,” Rectanus said. That will allow them to “make decisions when they see [that membership] that they can have confidence that [the company’s] policies, practices, and products are aligned with a safe framework.”

To have such a large number of education companies on board in this early stage signals that providers are actively thinking about things like data privacy, cybersecurity, and equity, Rectanus said, as well as the importance of safe AI across the collective, rather than just the individual organization.
Education companies need to “provide safe, secure, and equitable uses of artificial intelligence that unlock positive outcomes for students,” said Simon Allen, CEO of McGraw Hill, in a written statement. “AI, like many innovations before it, presents the world of education with a vast opportunity for exploration, disruption and advancement, and we must deploy it responsibly and purposefully in ways that bring joy and relief to students and educators.”
It’s also critical for education organizations to play an active role in shaping policies that will affect the technology’s development in schools and in the overall economy, Rectanus said.
Rectanus previously served as CEO and co-founder ofLearnPlatform, whichInstructureacquired in 2022. Rectanus also served as senior vice president of K-12 strategy at Instructure.
“Industry partners and leaders must help education policymakers at the federal, state, and international level on the power and opportunity of AI,” Rectanus said. “It’s encouraging investment into doing AI the right way and being responsive to [schools’ and the public’s] needs as the market shifts.”

See also: